# MA_Thesis

This repo contains my 2022 Master's Thesis for Computational Social Science at the University of Chicago. 

In this thesis, I aim to investigate the epidemiology of falls that caused hospitalizations among adults 65 years and older in the United States, its association with weather, the influence of demographic and socioeconomic variables, and how these relationships vary by modeling approach. I combine six years (July 2009 – July 2015) of monthly Medicare falls-related claims with meteorological data from the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA) National Weather Service (NWS) and county sociodemographic characteristics from the 5-year estimates of the 2010 – 2014 American Community Survey (ACS) to investigate multiple research questions. These include: 1) What is the effect of weather on monthly county fall rates among adults aged 65 years and older? 2) What is the effect of county demographic variables on monthly county fall rates? 3) What is the effect of socioeconomic characteristics on monthly county fall rates? 4) What is the importance of all these variables on monthly county fall rates when placed in competitive models? Do these associations vary by region of the country? 5) How do different modeling approaches affect these relationships and their spatial patterns? 
 
 

This repo is organized as followed: 

Data folder: raw and processed data from Medicare (falls), National Weather Service (meteorological variables), and the 2010 - 2014 American Community Survey (demographic and economic variables). 

Preparation folder: This folder includes scripts used to collect and pre-process the raw data sources. The raw falls data processing occured in the Falls_processing.ipynb jupyter notebook (Python). The raw weather variable scraping and preparation with the meteostat library occured in the weather_processing_daily.ipynb jupyter notebook (Python). The ACS county-level demographic and socioeconomic variables were collected from and prepared in the ACS_thesis.R R script. 

Analysis folder: This folder includes scripts used to analyze the thesis data. Data_processing.ipynb is the jupyter notebook that merges all three data sources together, prepares/cleans it for further analysis, and creates some exploratory/descriptive visualizations. The data_analysis.ipynb includes all the descriptive statistics and random forests for national and regional models used in the thesis. The Thesis_analysis.Rmd includes the mixed-effects Poisson regression models. 


________
Abstract: 

Falls are a leading cause of injury and death among older adults. There are few studies that use national longitudinal data and multiple weather metrics to explore complex relationships of environmental risk factors. This thesis compares machine learning (random forests) and classic statistical (mixed-effects Poisson regressions) methods to examine the influence and spatial variation of weather, demographic, and socioeconomic characteristics on county fall-related hospitalization rates among adults 65 years and older in the United States. Three county-level data sources were combined: 1) monthly Medicare hospitalization claims from July 2009 – July 2015 with either primary diagnosis or external cause codes indicating an accidental fall (ICD-9-CM codes E880-E888, excluding E887) 2) weather variables scraped from NOAA’s National Weather Service, and 3) sociodemographic characteristics from the 2010-2014 American Community Survey. National and regional modelling with each set of characteristics and both methods was conducted. Weather, demographic, and socioeconomic variables are all important predictors of fall-related hospitalization rates in older adults. Temperature variables were the most influential weather variables at the national level and for all regions except the Northeast. The random forests identified that high fall-related hospitalization rates were associated with temperature variability. The mixed-effects Poisson models demonstrated a U-shaped relationship where both monthly high maximum and low minimum temperatures are associated with greater risk at the national level and in particular regions, controlling for relevant sociodemographics. The two modelling approaches are compared, and the mixed-effects Poisson regressions have more consistently accurate performance likely due to their adjustment for spatial variation and confounding.  
